GEP 09 - Runtime checking via beartype (#1186)
iza-institute-of-labor-economics/gettsim: docs/geps/gep-09.md

(gep-9)=

# GEP 9 — Runtime Type Checking and the User/Canonical Type Split

```{list-table}
- * Author
  * [Hans-Martin von Gaudecker](https://github.com/hmgaudecker)
- * Status
  * Draft
- * Type
  * Standards Track
- * Created
  * 2026-05-23
- * Resolution
  * Pending — see [#GEPs](https://gettsim.zulipchat.com/#narrow/stream/309998-GEPs/topic/GEP.2009)
```

> ## Abstract

Reviewer: The abstract doesn't really make clear what beartype buys us. 

I think it should mention these points:

- Currently, there is not a lot of type checking when using GETTSIM. This led to dangerous silent bugs in the past and unreadable errors.
- This GEP proposes to add beartype as a runtime type checker that automatically verifies user's input data against the expected input types.
- To do this, GETTSIM/TTSIM are becoming explicit about the data the packages expect and type errors are standardized. 
- When writing GETTSIM policy functions, type annotations will become mandatory

Author: Done. Rewrote the abstract along your four bullets (silent bugs today → beartype runtime checker → explicit type vocabulary + canonicalisation → annotations on user policy functions) and added a Terminology subsection right after defining `claw`, `runtime check`, and `boundary` so the rest of the document is readable without prior beartype exposure.

This GEP introduces runtime type checking across `ttsim`, `gettsim`, and

> `gettsim-personas` via [beartype](https://beartype.readthedocs.io)'s package claw, and

Reviewer: I heard the term `claw` for the first time in a context unrelated to OpenClaw when you introduced beartype. This term feels ambiguous, but if it is a set term for type checkers we can keep it.

Author: Defined in the new Terminology subsection: "beartype's import-hook mechanism: a single `beartype_package()` call automatically applies `@beartype` to every annotated function in the package." Kept the term itself because it's `beartype`'s own vocabulary and the document refers to the mechanism often.

*ps - At least in the software ecosystem, bears with claws have been around for much longer than lobsters despite the recent gain in popularity of the latter...*

formalises the two-tier type vocabulary that the claw makes enforceable: a wide `UserX`
family at the user boundary and a narrow canonical `X` family inside the package. Each
user-facing entry point and decorator is wrapped with an explicit beartype configuration
that re-raises type-violations as a documented subclass of `TTSIMError`. Auto-vectorized
policy-function wrappers have their inherited scalar annotations stripped so that the
claw checks the wrapper against its true (column) signature.

## Motivation and Scope

> The ttsim DAG accepts a wide range of objects at its outer boundary — pandas Series,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The TTSIM DAG accepts a wide range of objects at its outer boundary — pandas Series,
```

Also everywhere else

Author: Thx, applied everywhere.

> The ttsim DAG accepts a wide range of objects at its outer boundary — pandas Series,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The ttsim DAG accepts a wide range of objects as inputs — pandas Series,
```

Author: Done.

numpy arrays, Python scalars, JAX arrays — and converts them internally into a narrower,
performance-oriented representation: jaxtyping-shaped JAX or numpy arrays for columns
and Python or numpy scalars for parameters. Today this distinction is implicit.
`typing.py` exposes a single `Array`-based vocabulary, the canonical internal types are
not named separately from their user-friendly supersets, and nothing enforces either

> contract at runtime. Three problems follow:

Reviewer: I think contract is an informal term in that context (also in GEP 4). Maybe "Nothing enforces type compliance at runtime".

Author: Replaced "nothing enforces either contract at runtime" with "no runtime check guarantees compliance." The term `contract` is still defined in the Terminology box for the few places where the document uses it later.

1. **Silent contract drift.** A policy function annotated `int` that is invoked with a

>    `jax.Array` works today, fails tomorrow on a backend swap, and has no guard at the

Reviewer: The point being that swapping the backend means input types need to change? If so, we should write this more clearly.

Author: Rewrote the silent-drift example to drop the backend-swap phrasing: "A policy function annotated `int` that is invoked with a `jax.Array` runs silently today; the mismatch only surfaces if a downstream JAX-specific operation fails on the unexpected dtype, often far from the offending input."

   boundary that would surface the mismatch with a useful error. Annotations are
   documentation, not specification.

> 1. **No single boundary for canonicalisation.** Every code path that takes user input

Reviewer: We should avoid "boundary", too technical IMO.

Also, I don't see why this point here should be raised in a GEP when it sounds like lazy architecture.

Author: 1. `boundary` is now defined in the Terminology box ("a function the user calls directly: `main()`, `InputData.df_and_mapper`, `@policy_function`, …").
2. On the substantive concern: rewrote the motivation point to read as a factual observation rather than a complaint — "Every code path that takes user input re-implements the cast from `pd.Series` or Python scalar or numpy scalar to a canonical numpy / JAX form. The conversions are scattered, and nothing enforces that they agree." The point belongs because the GEP's proposal *is* to funnel those conversions through named `_canonicalize_*` helpers; naming the scattered pre-state is what motivates that.

   re-implements the cast from "pandas Series or Python float or numpy scalar" to "JAX
   float column / numpy float scalar". The conversion is scattered, inconsistent, and
   impossible to type-check.

1. **Indistinguishable bug classes.** When a TT DAG raises `TypeError`, the user cannot
   tell whether they passed bad data, mis-declared a policy function, or hit an internal
   ttsim bug. There is no exception vocabulary that maps to architectural layers.

> 

Reviewer: Add another point that points to [TTSIM #97](https://github.com/ttsim-dev/ttsim/issues/97). Missing type checkers can lead to dangerous bugs.

Author: Added a fourth motivation bullet: "Past silent bugs. Missing or imprecise type checks have caused real,
hard-to-diagnose bugs (e.g. [TTSIM #97](https://github.com/ttsim-dev/ttsim/issues/97))."

**Scope.** The GEP covers `ttsim`, `gettsim`, and `gettsim-personas`. The
`@policy_function` dual-mode contract (scalar default vs. column-direct via
`vectorization_strategy="not_required"`) is touched here only insofar as the claw makes
it enforceable; the full contract is specified in a separate update to
{ref}`GEP 4 <gep-4>`.

## Usage and Impact

### Users see the same API, with sharper errors

A miss-typed input still raises a `TTSIMError` subclass, but now with the beartype
violation message attached. Calling `main()` with `policy_date_str` set to a
`datetime.date` instead of a string raises `EntryPointError` at the boundary, not
`AttributeError` six frames deep. Passing a pandas Series with object dtype where a
`FloatColumn` is expected raises `InputDataError`. Writing

```python
@policy_function(start_date="2025-01-01")
def betrag_m(anzahl: int, satz: float) -> float:
    return anzahl * satz
```

and accidentally calling it with `vectorization_strategy="not_required"` raises
`PolicyFunctionDefinitionError` at decoration time — the scalar annotations are
incompatible with column-direct execution.

### Wider boundary types, narrower internal types

> Code that takes user input declares its parameters with `UserX` aliases. The same code's

Reviewer: Rewrite to make clear what `UserX` is.
- We allow a broad selection of input types. The collection of these types is named `UserX` where X can be "FloatColumn", "IntColumn" etc. 
- We convert these types (via `_canonicalize_*` functions) to an internal representation with a much narrower type collection (e.g. pd.Series with uints is converted to...). The collection of these types is named `X`.
- This formalises how we think about types when using TTSIM, but does not change the API in any way.

Author: Restructured the "Wider boundary types, narrower internal types" subsection with your three-bullet shape: `UserX` is the wide vocabulary; `_canonicalize_*` produces `X`; this formalises how we reason about types and pins each conversion to one named function per boundary, without changing the public API in shape.

internal callees declare narrow canonical aliases (`X`). A small set of
`_canonicalize_*` functions sits at the boundary and is the only place that returns the
canonical form from the wide form. Once past canonicalisation, no internal function ever
sees a `pd.Series` or a bare Python `float` where a column is expected.

### Same runtime, more discoverable failures

The claw adds an O(n) container check on entry to every clawed function, but ttsim's
entry points are called rarely (per-run, not per-row), so the cost is invisible at the
boundary.

## Backward Compatibility

> User-facing public API is unchanged. Anyone whose code raised `TypeError`, `ValueError`,

Reviewer: Not true, users need to add type hints to the policy functions they have written themselves

Author: You're right, and I conflated two decorators in my first pass. The actual pre-GEP situation was uneven:

- `@policy_function` did **not** access annotations at decoration time. Missing annotations were silently tolerated — vectorization synthesises a wide default via `dags.get_annotations(func, default="IntColumn | FloatColumn | BoolColumn")` and the function compiles and runs with the imprecise default. The change here is "silent tolerance → friendly `PolicyFunctionDefinitionError`", which is sharper than I made it sound.
- `@policy_input` did access `func.__annotations__["return"]` directly and would `KeyError` if missing. That's the "obscure later error → friendly error" case.
- `@param_function`, `@agg_by_group_function`, `@agg_by_p_id_function`, `@group_creation_function` fall somewhere in between.

Rewrote Backward Compatibility to spell this out: "Pre-GEP, missing annotations were tolerated unevenly — `@policy_function` silently fell back to a wide default union via `dags`, while `@policy_input` raised a `KeyError` at decoration time. Post-GEP, all five `@*_function` decorators raise their matching `*DefinitionError` at decoration time, so the convention is enforced uniformly." Practical impact on existing `gettsim` code is still zero (every policy function is fully annotated) but the spec change is honest.

or a bare `Exception` from inside ttsim will now see a `TTSIMError` subclass instead.
Code that catches `Exception` keeps working; code that catches narrow built-in
exceptions will have to broaden to `TTSIMError` (or the relevant subclass). Two
pre-existing exception types are hoisted into the hierarchy without changing their

> definition site: `ConflictingActivePeriodsError` and `TranslateToVectorizableError`.

Reviewer: Implementation detail I'd say. But no strong opinion.

Author: I'd keep this. The two class names that users may have caught (`ConflictingActivePeriodsError`, `TranslateToVectorizableError`) are part of the public surface, and "they keep their import path" is exactly what someone with `try/except ConflictingActivePeriodsError:` in their pipeline needs to read. Happy to move it to a footnote if you'd prefer that instead.

Both keep their original import path.

> Internal callers that relied on the wide-form types (passing a `pd.Series` into a

Reviewer: I don't get what this paragraph is supposed to tell me.

Author: Collapsed to one sentence: "Internal code that passes wide types into narrow-typed functions surfaces as `BeartypeCallHintViolation` from the package-wide claw. These are pre-existing ttsim bugs to fix at the call site, not user-facing changes."

is to canonicalise at the boundary instead of pushing wide types deeper.

## Detailed Description

### The type vocabulary

`ttsim.typing` exposes three layers:

```python
# Narrow canonical column aliases — what flows on the TT DAG.
FloatColumn: TypeAlias = Float[Array | np.ndarray, " n_obs"]
IntColumn: TypeAlias = Int[Array | np.ndarray, " n_obs"]
BoolColumn: TypeAlias = Bool[Array | np.ndarray, " n_obs"]

# Narrow canonical scalar aliases — what flows out of param processing.
ScalarFloat: TypeAlias = float | np.floating
ScalarInt: TypeAlias = int | np.integer
ScalarBool: TypeAlias = bool | np.bool_

# Wide user-boundary aliases — what `main()` and friends accept.
UserFloatColumn: TypeAlias = FloatColumn | pd.Series
UserIntColumn: TypeAlias = IntColumn | pd.Series
UserBoolColumn: TypeAlias = BoolColumn | pd.Series
UserScalarFloat: TypeAlias = float | int | np.floating | np.integer
UserScalarInt: TypeAlias = int | np.integer
UserScalarBool: TypeAlias = bool | np.bool_
```

The column aliases use the `Array | np.ndarray` union so the same vocabulary covers both
backends. This is the single source of truth for column shapes; callers do not branch on
the backend.

> The aliases live at module top level, not under `if TYPE_CHECKING`. The claw needs them

Reviewer: This can go

Author: I'd keep it. The reason aliases must live at module top level (not under `if TYPE_CHECKING`) is the kind of thing a future maintainer adding a new column alias needs to know upfront. Without it, the next person adds an alias under `TYPE_CHECKING`, breaks the claw at decoration time, and spends an afternoon figuring out why. GEPs being technical documents, this kind of forward-looking constraint feels in scope.

at runtime to rewrite call sites.

> The wide forms are restricted to the user boundary. Inside ttsim, the narrow forms are

Reviewer: Maybe I'm missing something but this doesn't seem to be important for GEP readers

Author: I'd keep this too. After all, GEP's are our technical design documents. The rule "wide forms are restricted to the user boundary; internal code uses narrow" is the spec for the type split. Without it, the GEP only says "we have `UserX` and `X` aliases" without committing to where each is used. The follow-on "conversions are funnelled through `_canonicalize_*` helpers" is the spec that prevents wide types from leaking inward. That is precisely the property that the wide/narrow split is supposed to buy.

INTERNAL_CONF = BeartypeConf(
    strategy=BeartypeStrategy.On,
    is_pep484_tower=True,
)
```

The `On` strategy validates every entry of every container so a bad row inside a
dict-of-columns is reported rather than sampled past. `is_pep484_tower=True` keeps the
PEP 484 numeric tower active so that an `int` argument satisfies a `float` parameter —
the same implicit promotion that Python and ruff's `PYI041` both assume.

`INTERNAL_CONF` is the default for the package-wide claw. Its violations surface as
beartype's own `BeartypeCallHintViolation`, marking them as internal bugs.

### The package-wide claw

Each package's `__init__.py` registers the claw before any submodule loads:

```python
# src/ttsim/__init__.py — top of file, before any ttsim.* import
from beartype.claw import beartype_package

from ttsim._beartype_conf import INTERNAL_CONF

beartype_package("ttsim", conf=INTERNAL_CONF)

# ...remaining imports
```

`beartype_package` installs an AST rewriter against the package's import hook. Every
subsequent `import ttsim.*` produces a module whose annotated callables wrap themselves
in a beartype check on load. There is no per-file decorator, no opt-in list, and no way

> to forget a function. `gettsim` and `gettsim-personas` do the same with their own root

Reviewer: Didn't realise that when reviewing the TTSIM PR. Could this be an issue when users make isinstance checks or do some advanced things with `PolicyFunction` objects? Need to watch out for that.

Author: Good catch. I didn't appreciate the user-visible angle. Added a Limitations subsection at the end of "Detailed Description": the binding does happen under normal `import`, but the standard policy-module loader (`orig_policy_objects.py` → `spec_from_file_location`) is claw-free, so isinstance checks survive for the standard load path. The narrow bite case (`from my_pkg.policy_module import my_fn` and then `isinstance(my_fn, PolicyFunction)`) is documented along with the workaround.

  `end_date`, `vectorization_strategy`) — `POLICY_FUNCTION_CONF`
- `@policy_input`, `@param_function`, `@agg_by_group_function`, `@agg_by_p_id_function`,
  `@group_creation_function` — their matching confs
- `RoundingSpec` dataclass — `ROUNDING_SPEC_CONF`

The five `@*_function` decorators (`@policy_function`, `@param_function`,
`@agg_by_p_id_function`, `@agg_by_group_function`, `@group_creation_function`)
additionally require the wrapped function to carry an annotation on every parameter and
on the return — missing annotations raise `PolicyFunctionDefinitionError` (or the
decorator's matching analogue) at decoration time, so the stack trace points at the
function's definition site rather than at an internal DAG-build helper.

### The auto-vectorized-wrapper annotation problem

Scalar policy functions are wrapped at DAG-build time by `ttsim.tt.vectorization` and
`ttsim.tt.rounding`. The wrapper closes over the user function but is itself called on
columns. If the wrapper inherits the user function's scalar annotations via
`functools.wraps`, the claw checks column inputs against scalar annotations and rejects
every legitimate call.

> The fix uses two layers. The **inner** runtime executor—`numpy.vectorize`, the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The fix uses two layers. The **inner** runtime executor — `numpy.vectorize`, the
```

Author: Applied.

> AST-rewrite output, or the rounding callable—wraps the user function with

Reviewer: ```suggestion
AST-rewrite output, or the rounding callable — wraps the user function with
```

Author: Applied.

- [beartype documentation](https://beartype.readthedocs.io/en/latest/): the
  `beartype.claw.beartype_package` API used here, the `violation_param_type` hook, the
  `On` strategy.
- [jaxtyping](https://docs.kidger.site/jaxtyping/): shape-aware array types consumed by
  beartype.
- [GEP 4](gep-4): defines policy functions, the scalar default, and the
  `vectorization_strategy` field that the per-decoration check uses.

## Implementation

The pattern — package-wide beartype claw, `<Package>Error` exception hierarchy, wide
`UserX` types at user boundaries narrowing to canonical `X` types internally — is in
place across `ttsim`, `gettsim`, `gettsim-personas`, and `pylcm`. Every pixi test
environment runs with the claw on; a missing or mistaken annotation is a build break.

`.ai-instructions/modules/beartype.md` documents the conventions contributors follow:
when to use `UserX` vs `X`, how to add a new boundary decorator, the wrapper-annotation
rule, the claw-and-callable-instance gotcha, and the diagnostic workflow when a beartype
violation surfaces. The module is included in the `tier-a` profile by default so every
agent picks it up.

> ## Alternatives

Reviewer: I think all of these alternatives are rightfully not implemented. However, the real alternative is to write custom type checks as in the old days. 

Another alternative is not to enforce type annotations for user-written functions, forcing the type checker to be more lenient. I would emphasise that this is an option.

Author: Added two alternatives:

1. *Custom per-function type checks instead of runtime checking* — the pre-GEP `_fail_if_*` approach is what we had. Stays valid in principle, doesn't scale: each check requires editing a separate file and remembering to wire it in. The claw eliminates the wiring step.
  
2. *Leave annotations on user-written functions optional* — `_fail_if_missing_annotations` could downgrade to a warning and beartype would silently skip un-annotated parameters. Rejected because the goal degrades into "some functions are checked, some are not" with no in-band signal to the reader whether the missing check is deliberate or accidental. Since every existing GETTSIM policy function already carries full annotations, the strict policy enforces an existing convention, not a new requirement.
